Rewrite index.md (#111)
clockworklabs/spacetime-docs: docs/index.md

    </figcaption>
</figure>

> (This is similar to ["smart contracts"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Smart_contract), except that SpacetimeDB is a **database** and has nothing to do with blockchain. Because it isn't a blockchain, it can be dramatically faster than many "smart contract" systems.

Reviewer: If we're going to put this in here, should we add other differences - most notably, that SpacetimeDB is centralized?

Author: Technically you can run your own, which is good to put in the sales pitch. It's like the dangly glowing bit on an anglerfish.

> In fact, it's so fast that we've been able to write the entire backend of our MMORPG [BitCraft Online](https://bitcraftonline.com) as a Spacetime module. We don't have any other servers or services running. Everything in the game -- chat messages, items, resources, terrain, and player locations -- is stored and processed by the database. SpacetimeDB [automatically mirrors](#state-mirroring) relevant state to connected players in real-time.)

Reviewer: >  We don't have any other servers or services running.

This is not literally true; BitCraft uses a separate auth/accounts server. All the "game data" is in SpacetimeDB, but that requires a slightly restricted definition of "game data." I think this is fine, and we don't have to elaborate in this page, but it seemed worth noting.

SpacetimeDB is optimized for maximum speed and minimum latency, rather than batch processing or analytical workloads. It is designed for real-time applications like games, chat, and collaboration tools.

> Speed and latency is achieved by holding all of your application state in memory, while persisting data to a [write-ahead-log](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Write-ahead_logging) which is used to recover data after system crashes.

Reviewer: We actually have more of a write-behind log, much to Kim's consternation. I would replace "write-ahead-log" with "commit log." I would also say "restarts and crashes" or "crashes and restarts," instead of just "crashes."

> Speed and latency achieved by holding all of your application state in memory, while persisting data to a [write-ahead-log](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Write-ahead_logging) which is used to recover data after system crashes.

Author: is

## State Mirroring

SpacetimeDB can generate client code in a [variety of languages](#client-side-sdks). This code is like a library custom-designed to interface with your application. It provides easy-to-use interfaces for logging in and submitting requests to the server. It can also **automatically mirror state** from your module's database.

> You write SQL requests specifying what information a client is interested in -- for instance, the terrain and items near a player's avatar. SpacetimeDB's built-in ORM will generate types in your client language for every table in the database, and feed your client live updates whenever the database state changes. Don't worry about security, this is a **read-only** mirror -- the only way to change the database is to submit requests, which are validated on the server.

Author: whenever the subscribed database state changes

## Language Support

### Server-side Libraries

Currently, Rust is the best-supported language for writing SpacetimeDB modules. C# is also well-supported.

- [Rust](/docs/modules/rust) - [(Quickstart)](/docs/modules/rust/quickstart)
- [C#](/docs/modules/c-sharp) - [(Quickstart)](/docs/modules/c-sharp/quickstart)
- Python (Planned)
- Typescript (Planned)
- C++ (Planned)

> - Lua (Planned)

Reviewer: Remove these. Our future plans belong on the (forthcoming) roadmap page, and nowhere else in our docs.

### Table
A SpacetimeDB **table** is a database table. Tables are declared in a module's native language. For instance, in Rust, a table is declared like so:

```rust
#[spacetimedb::table(name = person, public)]
pub struct Player {
   #[primary_key]
   id: u64,
   name: String,
   age: u32,
   user: Identity,
}
```

The contents of a table can be read and updated by [reducers](#reducer).
Tables marked `public` can also be read by [clients](#client).

### Reducer
A **reducer** is a function exported by a [module](#module).
Connected [clients](#client-side-sdks) can call reducers to interact with the module.
This is a form of [remote procedure call](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call).
Reducers can be invoked across languages. For example, a Rust [module](#module) can export a reducer like so:

```rust
#[spacetimedb::reducer]

> pub fn set_player_name(ctx: &spacetimedb::ReducerContext, id: u64, name: String) -> Result<(), String> {

Author: TODO: we want a switchable widget here that swaps between C# and Rust.

## Language Support

### Server-side Libraries

Currently, Rust is the best-supported language for writing SpacetimeDB modules. C# is also well-supported.

- [Rust](/docs/modules/rust) - [(Quickstart)](/docs/modules/rust/quickstart)
- [C#](/docs/modules/c-sharp) - [(Quickstart)](/docs/modules/c-sharp/quickstart)

### Client-side SDKs

- [Rust](/docs/sdks/rust) - [(Quickstart)](/docs/sdks/rust/quickstart)
- [C#](/docs/sdks/c-sharp) - [(Quickstart)](/docs/sdks/c-sharp/quickstart)
- [TypeScript](/docs/sdks/typescript) - [(Quickstart)](/docs/sdks/typescript/quickstart)

### Unity

SpacetimeDB was designed first and foremost as the backend for multiplayer Unity games. To learn more about using SpacetimeDB with Unity, jump on over to the [SpacetimeDB Unity Tutorial](/docs/unity/part-1).

## Key architectural concepts

### Host

> A SpacetimeDB **host** is a combination of a database and server that runs [modules](#module). You can run your own SpacetimeDB host, or use a public host.
> Public hosts typically charge [energy](#energy) to run modules with a large amount of data or clients. However, the SpacetimeDB testnet is free.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A SpacetimeDB **host** is a combination of a database and server that runs [modules](#module). You can run your own SpacetimeDB host, or use the SpacetimeDB maincloud.
```

This is a public repo, so DM me or Tyler if you're curious about this change.

```rust
#[spacetimedb::reducer]
pub fn set_player_name(ctx: &spacetimedb::ReducerContext, id: u64, name: String) -> Result<(), String> {
   // ...
}
```
-->

And a C# [client](#client) can call that reducer:

```cs
void Main() {
   // ...setup code, then...
   Connection.Reducer.SetPlayerName(57, "Marceline");
}
```

These look mostly like regular function calls, but under the hood, the client sends a request over the internet, which the module processes and responds to.

The `ReducerContext` passed into a reducer includes information about the caller's [identity](#identity) and [address](#address).
It also allows accessing the database and scheduling future operations.

### Client
A **client** is an application that connects to a [module](#module). A client logs in using an [identity](#identity) and receives an [address](#address) to identify the connection. After that, it can call [reducers](#reducer) and query public [tables](#table).

Clients are written using the [client-side SDKs](#client-side-sdks). These are regular software libraries. Unlike the [server-side libraries](#server-side-libraries), they don't require the use of any special build tools.

### Identity

> A SpacetimeDB `Identity` allows someone to log in to a module.

Reviewer: No, an OIDC-compliant token allows someone to log into (or "connect to," I would rather say) a module. An `Identity` is just an opaque identifier for an actor in a SpacetimeDB application.

It's important that we keep the distinction between `Identity` and token, since identities are long lived, public and globally valid, whereas tokens are short-lived, sensitive and restricted in audience.

> Users receive an `Identity` by logging in through an [OpenID Connect](https://openid.net/developers/how-connect-works/) provider, such as Google or Facebook. Your module can choose which providers it trusts.

Reviewer: > Your module can choose which providers it trusts.

I'm not sure you actually can as of today. In order to do this, we'd need to expose tokens' `iss` claims to modules, and to recognize an error in `on_connect` as rejecting the connection.

A user's `Identity` is attached to every [reducer call](#reducer) they make, and you can use this to decide what they are allowed to do.

> Modules themselves also have Identities.  If your module lives on a shared SpacetimeDB [host](#host), like https://testnet.spacetimedb.com, it will automatically be issued an `Identity` to distinguish it from other modules. Your client application will need to provide this `Identity` when connecting to the host.

Reviewer: - Remove ref to testnet.
- This is true even of non-shared hosts, so don't hedge.

### Address

<!-- TODO: Rewrite this section after reworking `Address`es into `ConnectionID`s. -->

An `Address` identifies client connections to a SpacetimeDB module.

A user has a single [`Identity`](#identity), but may open multiple connections to your module. Each of these will receive a unique `Address`.

### Energy
**Energy** is the currency used to pay for data storage and compute operations in a SpacetimeDB host.

> Currently, energy tracking is relatively limited.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- TODO: Rewrite this section after finalizing energy SKUs. -->
```

Oh boy do we not want to tell people how easy it would be to exploit us! Also, we should TODO this section until we finalize what our SKUs are.

```cs
void Main() {
   // ...setup code, then...
   Connection.Reducer.SetPlayerName(57, "Marceline");
}
```

These look mostly like regular function calls, but under the hood, the client sends a request over the internet, which the module processes and responds to.

The `ReducerContext` passed into a reducer includes information about the caller's [identity](#identity) and [address](#address).
It also allows accessing the database and scheduling future operations.

### Client
A **client** is an application that connects to a [module](#module). A client logs in using an [identity](#identity) and receives an [address](#address) to identify the connection. After that, it can call [reducers](#reducer) and query public [tables](#table).

Clients are written using the [client-side SDKs](#client-side-sdks). These are regular software libraries. Unlike the [server-side libraries](#server-side-libraries), they don't require the use of any special build tools.

### Identity

A SpacetimeDB `Identity` identifies someone interacting with a module. It is a long lived, public, globally valid identifier that will always refer to the same end user, even across different connections.

> If the end user authenticates through an [OpenID Connect](https://openid.net/developers/how-connect-works/) provider, such as Google or Facebook, their `Identity` will be tied to the account they use on that provider.

Author: @gefjon please review this verbiage

Reviewer: I like this. Using the OIDC words is accurate and sounds good.

SpacetimeDB was designed first and foremost as the backend for multiplayer Unity games. To learn more about using SpacetimeDB with Unity, jump on over to the [SpacetimeDB Unity Tutorial](/docs/unity/part-1).

## Key architectural concepts

### Host
A SpacetimeDB **host** is a combination of a database and server that runs [modules](#module). You can run your own SpacetimeDB host, or use a public host.
Public hosts typically charge [energy](#energy) to run modules with a large amount of data or clients. However, the SpacetimeDB testnet is free.

### Module
A SpacetimeDB **module** is an application that runs on a [host](#host).

A module exports [tables](#table), which store data, and [reducers](#reducer), which allow [clients](#client) to make requests.

> Technically, a SpacetimeDB module is a [WebAssembly module](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/WebAssembly) that imports a specific low-level [WebAssembly API](/webassembly-api) and exports a small number of special functions. However, the SpacetimeDB [server-side libraries](#server-side-libraries) hide these low-level details. As a developer, writing a module is mostly like writing any other C# or Rust application, except for the fact that a [special CLI tool](/install) is used to build and deploy the application.

Reviewer: This is all really excellent. Thanks!

### Table
A SpacetimeDB **table** is a database table. Tables are declared in a module's native language. For instance, in Rust, a table is declared like so:

```rust
#[spacetimedb::table(name = person, public)]
pub struct Player {

>    id: u64,

Reviewer: Do you want to slap a `#[primary_key]` on here?

Author: Probably, I didn't want to overwhelm with detail but I think that would make sense here and give people the flavor of it.

   name: String,
   age: u32,
   user: Identity,
}
```

> The contents of a table can be read by [reducers](#reducer).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The contents of a table can be read and updated by [reducers](#reducer).
```

Tables marked `public` can also be read by [clients](#client).

### Reducer
A **reducer** is a function exported by a [module](#module).
Connected [clients](#client-side-sdks) can call reducers to interact with the module.
This is a form of [remote procedure call](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Remote_procedure_call).
Reducers can be invoked across languages. For example, a Rust [module](#module) can export a reducer like so:

```rust
#[spacetimedb::reducer]
pub fn set_player_name(ctx: &spacetimedb::ReducerContext, id: u64, name: String) -> Result<(), String> {
   // ...
}
```

And a C# [client](#client) can call that reducer:

```cs
void Main() {
   // ...setup code, then...

>    Reducer.SetPlayerName(57, "Marceline");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Connection.Reducers.SetPlayerName(57, "Marceline");
```

}
```

> These look mostly like regular function calls, but under the hood, they are cross-language RPC calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These look mostly like regular function calls, but under the hood, the client sends a request which the module processes and responds to.
```

I think we probably don't want to use acronyms like "RPC" too often. It's good to give readers who know what RPCs are a hook to understand, but it's not good to make readers who don't know go learn in order to understand.

The `ReducerContext` passed into a reducer includes information about the caller's [identity](#identity) and [address](#address).
It also allows accessing the database and scheduling future operations.

### Client
A **client** is an application that connects to a [module](#module). Clients are written using the [client-side SDKs](#client-side-sdks).

A client logs in using an [identity](#identity) and receives an [address](#address) to identify the connection.

### Identity
<!-- TODO: The following will need to be updated when we implement Tyler's Identity and Auth proposals. -->

A SpacetimeDB `Identity` allows someone to log in to a SpacetimeDB module.

> You can configure how your module issues Identities and which Identities it trusts. A user's `Identity` is attached to every [reducer call](#reducer), and you can use this to decide what they are allowed to do.

Reviewer: Modules don't issue identities. I think we should get someone who's more familiar with the new identity stuff, likely @jsdt , to update this section.

Author: Yes, this isn't written to be up-to-date with the identity proposal. I'm not sure about the implementation status of that.

> Currently, SpacetimeDB supports only a limited selection of `Identity` providers. Our long-term goal is to provide integration with most third-party [OpenID Connect](https://openid.net/developers/how-connect-works/) providers.

Reviewer: I think we can already accept any OIDC-compliant token, as of 1.0-rc1.

> ### Address

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Address
<!-- TODO: Rewrite this section after reworking `Address`es into session IDs. -->
```

An `Address` identifies both client connections and SpacetimeDB modules.

A user has a single [`Identity`](#identity), but may open multiple connections to your module. Each of these will receive a unique `Address`.

> Your module itself also has an `Address`. If your module lives on a shared SpacetimeDB [host](#host), like https://testnet.spacetimedb.com, this `Address` is used to distinguish it from other modules. Your client application will need to provide this `Address` when connecting to the host.

Reviewer: Is this still true as of 1.0-rc1? CC @jsdt @cloutiertyler
